I learned this big word from Yale historian Paul Kennedy, who used it in his big 1988 book, The Rise and Fall of Great Powers. The root of "fissiparous" is fission, or coming apart — the opposite of fusion, or fusing together. Thus, fissiparous tendencies are those tendencies pulling things, like the European Union, apart. And we've seen a lot of them in 2015. Their momentum tells us a lot about what 2016 will look like.

Kennedy wrote about fissiparous tendencies as part of reminding us, rightly, that great powers do fall apart. He cautioned against a repeated pattern of "military overreach" that could lead great powers to their demise. While critics found him too pessimistic regarding America's prospects, events over the past decade, culminating in events of the past year, culminating in events of the past week — the split between Saudi Arabia and the Shiite populations in the Middle East — make some of his cautions look prescient.

We like to be able to say, "It's all coming together." We like to be able to report increasing harmony and cooperation. But let us beware premature declarations of a kumbaya moment in history. For all the celebrations of globalization and an emerging planetary consciousness that transcends old differences, we are not all One. We are defined in part by our differences, as regrettable as that might at first sound.

In this column I'll look at four different fissiparous tendencies: Europe, inequality, Islam's internal conflicts and the wretchedness of the U.S.-Russia relationship. Of course, it's impossible to cast much light on so many big topics in such a short space, but the point is to reveal through their rapid juxtaposition how their interrelationships amplify the potential for fissiparous tendencies in each.

Europe

The threat of a Grexit was thwarted, but the structural problems of European monetary policy and finance were not solved. Like many of our readers, I was impressed by my colleague Luc de Keyser's portrayal of an extended Greek tragedy, the last act of which we have yet to see.

Now the much-vaunted and -hoped-for unity of a borderless Europe is under further strain from the immigration crisis, which also compounds the clash with radical Islam and the threat of further terrorism.

What is Global Affairs?
The stresses and strains that make for fissiparous tendencies loop back upon one another in patterns of systematic interconnection and mutual reinforcement. The immigration crisis heightens Islamophobia. Islamophobia strengthens the right wing. The right wing wants to close borders and erect fences to keep out the immigrants. Border controls built to wall out Muslims add fuel to radical Islam's appeal to unemployed Muslim youth.

Inequality

These tensions aren't just tearing Europe apart country from country, religion from religion, culture from culture; they are also exploding in a vertical dimension of accelerating inequality. As French economist Thomas Pikkety informed us, the decline in inequality that seemed so promising for much of the 20th century may well turn out to have been anomalous. In our new gilded age, the rich are getting richer and the 99 percent are grumbling.

How are they grumbling? At the ballot box. The ominous increase in populist votes cast in Poland, Hungary, France and the United States, and the policies of Poland's Beata Szydlo, Hungary's Viktor Orban, France's Marine Le Pen, and the United States' Donald Trump, are a perfectly natural reaction to the fear, nay terror, induced by the Islamic State.

Even as the very rich sail upward to new heights of luxury living, expanding middle classes are grumbling about those nipping at their heels, whether it's American blue-collar workers frustrated as their jobs are lost to immigrants or to Mexico and East Asia, or Europeans anxious about Syrians, Turks and North Africans.

Fear and uncertainty find their homes at the bottom of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, in the need for security, the need to simply stay alive. This need is basic, not as ennobling as higher needs for belonging or self-expression. Where the longitudinal evidence from Ronald Inglehart's global values surveys show an unmistakable march of long-term progress toward those higher aspirations for a healthy balance between group solidarity and individual self-expression, the year 2015 feels like a stutter step backward on that long march.



The year 2016 is going to see further suggestions of a "clash of civilizations," the phrase made famous by Samuel Huntington's book with the same name. But I remain committed to the view developed in an earlier column that the real clash is not so much among our various civilizations as it is a clash within each of the great civilizations: a clash between those who have made it (in a broad sense that includes not only economic metrics, but also political, psychological and spiritual achievements), and those who have been left behind.

This gap yawns ever wider with each new step on the road of progress, each new generation of smart phone, each new technologically assisted way to make a living. It's hard to see how to reduce this yawning gap short of stopping progress on the one hand — an unlikely prospect — or bringing along the hindmost on the other. And by "bringing along the hindmost," I don't just mean economic development. The rise of radical Islam is something quite different from an economically motivated revolt of the impoverished.

Moderate vs. Radical Islam

In a 2003 book titled Terror and Liberalism, Paul Berman painted a picture of radical Islamic terrorism that today, 13 years later, looks more relevant than ever. He devotes several chapters of his book to the life and writings of Sayyid Qutb, an Egyptian theologian and philosopher who passed long years in jail writing a 30-volume commentary on the Koran.

If Marx was to Communism what the Prophet Mohammed was to Islam, then Qutb is Islam's Lenin. According to Qutb, the great problem with the West, Christianity and Zionism is a failure to see the totality of God, the unity of all things in Allah, to whom we must surrender totally. In Christianity's willingness to surrender unto Caesar what is Caesar's, Christianity takes from God what, according to Islam, is properly God's. Especially as institutionalized in the Reformation that separated Church from State, the West has fallen away from a way of life that subjects everything to the will of Allah.

By "liberalism," Berman does not mean the kind of liberalism that is opposed to conservatism in American politics, but rather the larger rational compact that ties together ideas of human rights, liberty, democracy and the free market. In Berman's view, this larger liberalism's failure in dealing with terror is its refusal to acknowledge the role of the irrational in human affairs, its failure to accept the possibility that large groups of people can act in pathological ways over extended periods of time.

In the years after Word War I, people tried to come to terms with the horror meted out when honor and heroism lost out to modern technologies of warfare. The liberal compact between rationality and progress, science and democracy, died in the mud of the trenches.

"Those were the years when the liberal project of the nineteenth century finally went to pieces—the years when the simpleminded principles of rational thought and inevitable progress began to look, in their ingenuousness, grotesque and mendacious. Those were the years, in the immediate aftermath of the world war, when the new mass movements arose for no other purpose than to declare the old liberal project of the nineteenth century a lie . . . Those were the years when 'vanguards' of self-sacrificing militants tried to lead mankind out of the corruptions and horrors of liberal civilization into a new life—granite, solid, unified, the new age of the resurrected empire of yore, the age of purity and eternity. Those were the years of the heroic leaders, the supermen and geniuses who, in their evident madness, seemed to be flecked with the divine."

Sound familiar? What I find most disturbing in these lines from Berman is their resonances with refrains heard from both extremes of fissiparous tendencies. Both in the rhetoric of radical Muslims and in populist refrains from Poland to Trump's call to make America great again, the extremes take in each others' wash. They feed each other in their extremism.

How could any good emerge from this devil's brew we call contemporary Europe? There's nothing like a hefty boost in immigration to cure a demographic collapse. Germany, France, Hungary, Italy and Greece — all of the countries being overrun by immigrants from Syria and North Africa — are failing to reproduce themselves on their own. They cannot produce enough young doctors and lawyers to serve their aging populations. But many of the migrants are middle- and upper-middle-class professionals, not the wretched of the earth. They could serve as the working class to satisfy the needs and wants of Europe's aging retirees.

If only people could get along with strangers! Here's the uncertainty. So far, Europe has shown itself even less capable of integrating immigrants than the United States. But who knows; just to the extent that many of the current immigrants are better educated and more skilled than earlier waves of Turkish "guest workers," they may pose a threat rather than a solution.

In any case, a little more rubbing of elbows over the years, a little less ghettoization, and integration is possible. Friends of mine have been working for years on what they call the Abrahamic Family Reunion. There is a possibility that accord can be reached, at the highest levels of theological syncretism and at the day-to-day level of people elbow-to-elbow in the marketplace.

Cities join us in civility. Citizen diplomacy joins teachers with teachers, astronauts with cosmonauts, doctors with doctors. We are learning, person to person, how to mix. The problem is not an inevitable clash of civilizations or cultures or beliefs. These can mix, as they always have, if at lower velocity.

A New Cold War?

The fissiparous tendencies in the world right now extend to the divisiveness between Russia and the United States. How can we have come so far without mention of Ukraine? Crimea? Donbas?

Relations between the United States and Russia are worse than they have been at any time since the end of the Cold War. Or are they? Russia pulled the United States back across President Barack Obama's red line in Syria by stepping in to accept President Bashar al Assad's store of chemical weapons. Russia bailed out the United States in Iran by stepping in to accept Iran's store of uranium.

For all the bluster and posturing on both sides, Russia and the United States seem to be collaborating successfully on several fronts, not least in the struggle against the Islamic State, as well as in efforts to restrain sabre-rattling from China and North Korea.

Despite the fact that Putin bashing makes for colorful copy in the media, the interests of the West and the interests of Russia are in many ways more closely aligned than are the interests of other great powers. The appearance of fissiparous tendencies masks a deeper solidarity — in culture, in religion, in democratic capitalism, albeit of distinctly different shades.

Bottom Line

The gap between those who have made it and those who have been left behind — in each of our great civilizations — yawns ever wider. And the resentment, the indignity, the fury burns ever brighter.

There is a problem with terror and liberalism, and Berman nailed it. There is a tendency on the part of liberals to think that terrorists can be won over with rational persuasion and reforms. But this is false. Nothing short of revolution, of utter surrender to a theocracy and to the will of Allah as interpreted by the Mullah, will satisfy Salafist terrorists. And it is this extremism, this totalitarian totalism at the heart of Islamic theology, that nurtures, at the very edge of an otherwise benign core, Islamic radicalism.

"The notion of Islam as totality was, I would venture, Qutb's most important concept. The concept of totality, he thought, distinguished Islam from all other worldviews . . . Every page of In the Shade of the Qur'an can be seen as a commentary on the single affirmation, "There is no God but Allah." Every new theme and topic offered Qutb a fresh opportunity to demonstrate that nature, man, and man's obligations come from a single source, which is God. And Islam is the acknowledgment of that one overwhelming reality."

You don't hear much talk about Buddhist Radicalism. Hindus can get extreme, especially when pushed by Muslims. Judaism has its Orthodox wing. Christianity has its fundamentalists. Each of the great religions has its extremists. But, as Qutb himself claimed, there is something unique in the theology of Islam, its totalism, and that totalism holds within it, according to Berman, an incipient totalitarianism.

Now, as I have written before in this space, I do not agree with Sam Harris' statement that Islam is "the mother lode of bad ideas." There is beauty and glory in Islam. But as an outsider who knows virtually nothing of the Koran, much less of Qutb's 30-volume commentary, it strikes me as a good idea to encourage our moderate Muslim friends to encourage their less moderate co-religionists to rein in the extremes of radical Islam.

Only they can do it — one of several reasons we are so happy to welcome Anisa Mehdi into this space. The fissiparous tendencies among today's Muslims — between Sunni and Shiite, and between the various nations of the Middle East — are now extreme, as we have just seen in the split over the Saudis' execution of a Shiite cleric. The civil war among Muslims (not a clash of civilizations) is more worrisome over the long run than the fissiparous tendencies in either the rich vs. poor, or populist vs. immigrant, or Russia vs. West splits. They have their silver linings, their counter-trends. But the fissiparous tendencies among Muslims threaten fission of a non-nuclear kind. And fission in Islam will only exacerbate other forms of political extremism.